If you are unfamiliar with the concept of a for loop, then this is going to be a really exciting and
really groundbreaking video for you.
And if you are already familiar with the concept and the usage of for loops, then, well, I hope you also
find this video exciting or at least pretty interesting. So I'm going to explain the concept of a for
loop in the slides and then I'll switch to Python and show you how to implement for loops and then I'll
give you the opportunity to get some more experience with using for loops and also using for loops to
understand powers.
So let's get started.
Here is the basic idea of a for loop.
The idea of a for loop is to write some code can be one line of code or several lines of code and that
code gets repeated some number of times so in this case I'm just writing X to mean that it can be repeated
any number of times.
Now this is not the exact Python formatting for a for loop.
I'll show you that on the next slide I just want to give you a general idea of how for loops work.
So the idea is that this code gets run and this code gets run and then these two lines of code, or however
many lines of code you have, get run X time so maybe that's twice or maybe it's 200 times or maybe it's
two trillion times.
So here is what the exact Python formatting looks like.
So you have these reserved keywords for and in. Reserved keywords mean that it's not possible to
create variables using the letters for or a variable in. so we say for X and this is a variable
in and then you have some list or some set that you're going to loop over and then you have a colon
here; that's pretty important.
You're gonna get an error message if you don't include the colon here and then here you write your code
and in Python all the lines of code that should be inside the for loop have exactly four spaces.
It's easy to remember that you need four spaces because this is a "four" loop.
I don't know if that's the reason why they have it be four spaces, but maybe there is a connection there.
So you can write however many lines of code you want as long as the code is indented by four spaces.
It's going to be run as part of this for loop.
Now this variable x is going to take on each of these values at each different iteration.
Inside this for loop.
So the first time that this code is run X will equals zero and then whenever all the code inside this
for loop is done we go back to the top of the for loop and then X equals 1 and then all the way through
the code and then X will equal 2 through the code and then X will equal 3 and again run through all
the code.
And once you've gotten through all of these numbers and here are all these options all the items in
this list, then the for loop is finished and python will continue with whatever code if there is any
code after the for loop.
Now when we switch to Python I'm also going to introduce you to another function called range the .function
Range will generate a range of numbers that goes from the first number to 1 minus the second number.
So in this case this will produce the numbers 0 1 2 so it doesn't produce the number 3.
It goes up to 1 less than 3.
This is a pretty convenient way of setting up a for loop as you will see in a moment.
So let's get started with a simple example to show the basic idea of a for loop.
So we have for I in 0 1 2 3.
How about this.
And now I'm actually going to omit the colon here just so you can see what happens.
First of all when I pressed Enter you can see the cursor went all the way back to the beginning so all
the way back to the left.
But I said that there needs to be four spaces.
I'm going to write one two three four and now I'm going to say print i.
So what this for loop is going to do is print out the value of i for each iteration inside this for
loop.
Now I expect to see the numbers 0 1 2 3 because this for loop is going to go over the numbers in this set.
0 1 2 3.
Okay so now I tried to run this code and we get an error message and it says invalid syntax and you
can see it's highlighting the line where the problem is and it shows a little caret symbol at the end
of the line.
So that's our cue that we are missing a colon like this.
Okay so now I ran this cell we get no error message, and we just print out 0 1 2 3.
So this variable I can also be used as a regular variable just like how you've used before.
So for example we can say I times two.
So now this is going to print out 0 times 2 and then 1 times 2 and 2 times 2 and so on.
So that is the basic idea of a for loop.
Now I'm going to show you the function range. I showed in the slides range 0 through 3 and now when
I press control enter to run the code in this cell, Python actually just prints out range 0 3 so a
range is its own type of object in Python.
If you want to see what are the actual values you have to convert that into a list.
And so to convert a range into a list you can use the function list. You can see that these are all reserved
functions.
So for and in and print and range and list -- they are printed in green text unlike the variable which
is printed in black text.
So whenever you see green text in Python or at least in Jupyter then you know that that is a special
reserved keyword.
In these cases they are functions.
Okay.
So now let's incorporate this idea of range into a for loop.
So I'm going to say for... well used i up here and I used X in the slide.
How about q? And actually I'll even use qwerty just to show you that these variables don't need to be single
letters.
So for qwerty in range 0 to 3 and now I'm going to put a colon here.
Now remember when I didn't put a colon up here and I press the Enter key the new line key.
The cursor went all the way here to the left but now I've set up this first line of the for loop correctly
including with the colon and now when I press enter python will automatically put the cursor into the
fourth position.
So that's pretty convenient.
I don't need to count out for spaces for this.
For loop.
So now inside this for loop I'm going to write
print.
This is the and then percent G T H iteration.
Now here are going to say
Percent qwerty.
So this is going to print out on the first iteration it's going to say this is the 0th iteration.
It looks a little bit strange having this percent G and then immediately with no space afterwards I
just go right to the T H.
However, Python knows that this special character percent indicates to print one character and that corresponds
to a number for a G.
Okay.
So when I run this we get these slightly not totally grammatically correct result that this is the zeroeth
iteration, that one is correct, but then we see this is the oneth iteration.
This is the twoth iteration... if you would like to have special cases for this to say this is the first
iteration and this is the second iteration that's going to require some additional knowledge about control
structures in Python and you will learn about those kinds of structures such as if then statements in
a later part of this course.
So for now let's just forget about this, that it's slightly wrong.
It's okay for now.
I would like to show you one more example of using a for loop before we get to the exercise for this
video.
And the next example that I'm going to show you is essentially combining what I did up here with combining
what I did up here.
I'm going to use the looping variable here in a mathematical operation and then print out some information
here.
So I will say for... and what letters we use?
How about T.
So t in range 0 to
Let's go to 5.
So I'm going to say num equals T squared so t to the power of 2.
Now actually I can run this immediately as it is.
We got no error messages and no warnings but we also didn't print anything out so it's tough to know
what actually was going on here.
So therefore I'm going to add another line and that's going to say print num so pretty simple.
And essentially what we've done is computed powers or squares.
Now the numbers that go in this range,
so remember that's going to start from zero and it's going to go up to 4, which is one less than the
second number.
So zero squared is zero one squared is one two squared three squared and four squared is 16. Here is the
exercise for this video.
The exercise for this video is to use a for loop to print out.
Basically this text.
So you want to write two to the power of zero is one, two to the power of one is two, and so on down to
nine.
So this has to go in a for loop.
You can already guess that the for loop will go from zero to 9 and then yeah you just have to use some
knowledge that you've already learned in the past several videos to produce this output.
So now is your opportunity to pause the video, work through this problem,
make sure you can produce this kind of a result.
And when you have finished, you can come back to the video and then I'm going to solve the problem.
I need a new cell here. Now,
previously I've been creating new cells by pressing shift enter.
You can also create a new cell underneath the current cell by typing alt enter, and you can also go up
here to the menu and say insert cell below.
The advantage of pressing insert cell below is that this doesn't actually run the current line.
So if you don't actually want to run the cell then this is one way to get a new cell without running
the code in this cell.
Okay so we need a for loop, so let's say for i in range and our range is sometimes a bit tricky; it's easy
to forget that the number that you want to go up to is one below the second input. So to go from numbers
0 through 9 you actually have to write range zero comma 10 and then what we want to write in here we
want to print out the statement two to the power of... percent G and that's going to be substituted
with this variable i is.
And now I don't know what that number is going to be.
So I'm going to write percent G and we are going to compute it out here.
So I'm going to say i.
And then we need star star
i. So let's have a look before we run this is going to say two to the power of and then this is going to
be the first element here.
So i.
Two to the power of the looping index variable here is and then it's going to be whatever two to the
i ends up being.
So that looks pretty good.
The last thing that I would like to do is make this code a little bit more flexible, because remember
the goal of this course -- the big picture idea of this course -- is for you to learn how to use python as
a tool to help you understand math. And to do that we need to make sure that you can code in Python flexibly
to perform lots of different mathematical operations.
So I'm going to make this more flexible here.
This is hard coded to be two.
So it's always two to the power of whatever this number ends up being.
So two is hardcoded, so I'm going to create a new variable.
Call it base. And let's start by making it two here.
So this is going to say %G.
And now I'm going to add base here as the first number that gets implemented here or replaced over here
and then of course is not two to the power of I but instead it's base to the power of I.
So now I'm going to run this code again and we shouldn't see any change.
It's always good in programming to start changing your code by testing it against a known result.
So I know that if I get a different result from what you see here than I've done something wrong.
OK.
So the result here is the same.
And now that allows us to explore powers or exponents with different bases.
So for example you can say base equals three and then you see three to the power of for example three
to the power eight is six thousand five hundred and sixty one.
And now just out of curiosity let's see what happens if I make this thirty two.
It seems like a good number.
OK so thirty two to the power of nine.
That's a huge number that is 32 times 32 times 32 and so on up to nine times.
Now this might look like a weird number it says three point five.
Which kind of seems like a small number, but then at the end there is this E plus thirteen. This is something
called scientific notation and if you are not familiar with scientific notation or maybe you are familiar
with scientific notation but not in Python coding then don't worry I'm going to explain what this is
I'm going to have a whole video about this later on in the course.
For now suffice it to say that this number means basically a three followed by 13 other numbers.
So these are some of the numbers but it's essentially a little bit more than three
followed by 13 zeros.
So this is a really really really large number. In this video you learned about for loops.
What it means to have a for loop and how to create a for loop in Python.
And you saw how to use for loops to help you understand powers in particular to help you understand
increasing powers of base numbers.
Now over the past several videos I've been mentioning this concept of order of operations.
It's a really important concept in numerical math and in the next video you are finally going to get
to learn all about order of operations and math and how that plays out in Python and how to override
the order of operations.
I will see you in the next video.